advanced/submissions/team-members/Nima-Safara/README.md, before:

# Car Price Prediction Web Application

This is a full-stack web application that predicts car prices using a pre-trained XGBoost model, served via FastAPI and an interactive HTML frontend.

## Features

### Backend
- **FastAPI** with automatic API documentation (`/docs`, `/redoc`)
- **Modern lifespan context manager** for startup/shutdown events (no deprecation warnings)
- **XGBoost compatibility layer** handles older model versions seamlessly
- **Robust error handling** with HTTPException and detailed logging
- **Health & readiness checks** (`/health`, `/ready`) for Kubernetes/Docker deployments
- **Environment-based model loading** with `MODEL_PATH` override support
- **Pydantic v2 validation** with modern Annotated types and field constraints
- **Comprehensive logging** for debugging and monitoring

### Frontend
- **Fully dropdown-based interface** - no typing required, prevents invalid inputs
- **Smart cascading dropdowns** - model options update based on manufacturer selection
- **Model-specific filtering** - fuel types and engine sizes filter based on car model
- **Custom mileage input** - option to enter exact mileage values
- **Enhanced error handling** - user-friendly error messages with actionable feedback
- **API documentation link** - quick access to interactive API docs
- **Responsive design** - works on desktop, tablet, and mobile

## Project Structure
```
Nima-Safara/
├── main.py            # FastAPI backend application
├── index.html         # Frontend user interface
├── requirements.txt   # Python dependencies
├── Dockerfile         # Docker configuration for deployment
├── .dockerignore      # Docker build optimization
├── DEPLOYMENT.md      # Deployment guide (Render/Hugging Face)
└── README.md          # Documentation
```

Model file (outside this folder): `SDS-CP040-modelops/models/model.pkl`

## Setup
1) Create a virtual environment and install dependencies
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Optional: set a custom model path
```
# Windows (PowerShell)
$Env:MODEL_PATH = "<ABSOLUTE_PATH_TO>/models/model.pkl"
# macOS/Linux
export MODEL_PATH="<ABSOLUTE_PATH_TO>/models/model.pkl"
```

3) Run the application
```
python main.py
```
The app runs on http://localhost:8000

## Using the App

### Web Interface
1) Open your browser at `http://localhost:8000`
2) Select car details using the dropdowns:
   - **Manufacturer** → **Model** (cascading dropdown)
   - **Fuel Type** (filtered based on model)
   - **Engine Size** (filtered based on model)
   - **Year of Manufacture** (2000-2025)
   - **Mileage** (preset options or custom input)
3) Click "Predict Price"
4) The predicted price displays in GBP (£)

### Interactive API Documentation
- **Swagger UI**: Visit `http://localhost:8000/docs` to:
  - View all endpoints and their schemas
  - Test API calls interactively with "Try it out"
  - See request/response examples
  - Copy curl commands

- **ReDoc**: Visit `http://localhost:8000/redoc` for:
  - Clean, readable documentation
  - Printer-friendly format
  - Easy navigation

## API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description | Response |
|----------|--------|-------------|----------|
| `/` | GET | Serves the HTML frontend | HTML page |
| `/health` | GET | Liveness probe for K8s/Docker | `{ "status": "healthy" }` |
| `/ready` | GET | Readiness probe (checks model loaded) | `{ "model_loaded": true\|false }` |
| `/features` | GET | Returns available feature values for dropdowns | Feature lists and ranges |
| `/metadata` | GET | Model information and feature schema | Model metadata |
| `/predict` | POST | Predicts car price | `{ "predicted_price_gbp": float }` |
| `/docs` | GET | Interactive API documentation (Swagger UI) | Auto-generated docs |
| `/redoc` | GET | Alternative API documentation (ReDoc) | Auto-generated docs |

### Example: Making a Prediction

**Request** (POST `/predict`):
```json
{
  "Manufacturer": "Toyota",
  "Model": "RAV4",
  "Fuel type": "Hybrid",
  "Engine size": 2.5,
  "Year of manufacture": 2020,
  "Mileage": 30000
}
```

**Success Response** (200):
```json
{
  "predicted_price_gbp": 25430.75
}
```

**Error Responses**:
- **503** - Model not loaded:
  ```json
  {
    "detail": "Model not loaded. Please check server logs and try again later."
  }
  ```
- **500** - Prediction error:
  ```json
  {
    "detail": "Prediction failed: <error details>"
  }
  ```
- **422** - Validation error (invalid input):
  ```json
  {
    "detail": [
      {
        "loc": ["body", "Engine size"],
        "msg": "ensure this value is greater than 0",
        "type": "value_error.number.not_gt"
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

## Technical Details

### Model Features
The model uses the following features:
- **Input**: Manufacturer, Model, Fuel type, Engine size, Year of manufacture, Mileage
- **Derived**: Age (current year - year of manufacture), Mileage per year, Vintage flag (age ≥ 20 years)
- **Current year**: Dynamically set to system date for age calculations

### Dropdown Data Sources

The application uses a **hybrid approach** for populating dropdown menus:

#### ✅ **From Trained Model** (Extracted at Runtime)
These values are **extracted directly from the model's OneHotEncoder** to ensure 100% compatibility:
- **Manufacturers**: BMW, Ford, Porsche, Toyota, VW
- **Models**: M5, X3, Z4, Fiesta, Focus, Mondeo, 718 Cayman, 911, Cayenne, Prius, RAV4, Yaris, Golf, Passat, Polo
- **Fuel Types**: Diesel, Hybrid, Petrol

**How it works**: The `/features` endpoint extracts categories from the model's preprocessor:
```python
categories = cat_transformer.categories_
manufacturers = sorted(categories[0].tolist())  # Directly from model
models = sorted(categories[1].tolist())          # Directly from model
fuel_types = sorted(categories[2].tolist())      # Directly from model
```

#### ⚙️ **Reasonable Defaults** (For User Convenience)
These provide sensible options for numeric fields (the model accepts any reasonable value):
- **Engine Sizes**: 0.8L to 5.0L (common car engine sizes)
- **Years**: 2000-2025 (reasonable car manufacturing years)
- **Mileage Options**: 0 to 300,000 km (with option for custom input)

**Model-by-Manufacturer Mapping**:
- Hardcoded in frontend for cascading dropdown functionality
- Can be overridden by placing a `models_map.json` file next to the model

### Error Handling
- **Backend**: HTTPException with detailed error messages and logging
- **Frontend**: User-friendly error messages with specific guidance:
  - Model loading issues
  - Invalid inputs
  - Network errors
  - Server errors with details

### Deployment Notes
- Frontend uses **relative URLs** for API calls, making it proxy-friendly
- **CORS is open** (`allow_origins=["*"]`) - restrict in production
- **Health checks** available for container orchestration
- **Environment variables** supported for flexible deployment
- Dependencies have **version ranges** to avoid breaking changes

## Troubleshooting

### Model Loading Issues
If you see "Model not loaded" errors:
1. Check the model path: `C:\...\SDS-CP040-modelops\models\model.pkl`
2. Set `MODEL_PATH` environment variable if model is elsewhere
3. Check server logs for detailed error messages

### Version Compatibility
The application includes automatic compatibility handling:
- **XGBoost**: Automatically handles models trained on older versions (deprecated parameters like `gpu_id` are patched at runtime)
- **Scikit-learn**: You may see version warnings - these are informational only and don't affect functionality
- The XGBoost warning about `Booster.save_model` is expected when loading older pickled models

### Port Already in Use
If port 8000 is busy:
```python
# In main.py, change:
uvicorn.run(app, host="0.0.0.0", port=8001)  # Use different port
```

## Deployment

This application is ready for production deployment with Docker support.

### Docker Deployment
The application includes a production-ready Dockerfile and can be deployed to:
- **Render** - Free/paid cloud platform with automatic deployments
- **Hugging Face Spaces** - ML-focused deployment platform
- Any Docker-compatible platform (AWS ECS, Google Cloud Run, Azure Container Apps, etc.)

**Quick Docker Test**:
```bash
docker build -t car-price-api .
docker run -p 8000:8000 car-price-api
```

**For detailed deployment instructions**, see [DEPLOYMENT.md](DEPLOYMENT.md) which includes:
- Step-by-step guides for Render and Hugging Face
- Environment configuration
- Troubleshooting tips
- Production recommendations

### Key Deployment Features
✅ Health checks for container orchestration
✅ Model included in Docker image
✅ Dynamic port binding (supports Render's PORT variable)
✅ Production-optimized dependencies
✅ Proper error handling and logging

## Future Enhancements
- [ ] Add authentication/authorization
- [ ] Implement rate limiting
- [ ] Add prediction history and analytics
- [ ] Support for batch predictions
- [ ] Model versioning and A/B testing
- [ ] Prometheus metrics endpoint
- [ ] Kubernetes deployment manifests

Commit message:

feat: Add Docker deployment with local model copy
  - Include model.pkl in repository for self-contained deployment
  - Update model loading to prioritize local copy
  - Add Dockerfile and deployment guide for Render/Hugging Face
  - Configure Docker build with health checks and dynamic port binding

advanced/submissions/team-members/Nima-Safara/README.md, after:

# Car Price Prediction Web Application

This is a full-stack web application that predicts car prices using a pre-trained XGBoost model, served via FastAPI and an interactive HTML frontend.

## Features

### Backend
- **FastAPI** with automatic API documentation (`/docs`, `/redoc`)
- **Modern lifespan context manager** for startup/shutdown events (no deprecation warnings)
- **XGBoost compatibility layer** handles older model versions seamlessly
- **Robust error handling** with HTTPException and detailed logging
- **Health & readiness checks** (`/health`, `/ready`) for Kubernetes/Docker deployments
- **Environment-based model loading** with `MODEL_PATH` override support
- **Pydantic v2 validation** with modern Annotated types and field constraints
- **Comprehensive logging** for debugging and monitoring

### Frontend
- **Fully dropdown-based interface** - no typing required, prevents invalid inputs
- **Smart cascading dropdowns** - model options update based on manufacturer selection
- **Model-specific filtering** - fuel types and engine sizes filter based on car model
- **Custom mileage input** - option to enter exact mileage values
- **Enhanced error handling** - user-friendly error messages with actionable feedback
- **API documentation link** - quick access to interactive API docs
- **Responsive design** - works on desktop, tablet, and mobile

## Project Structure
```
Nima-Safara/
├── main.py            # FastAPI backend application
├── index.html         # Frontend user interface
├── requirements.txt   # Python dependencies
├── model.pkl          # Pre-trained XGBoost model (1.8MB)
├── Dockerfile         # Docker configuration for deployment
├── .dockerignore      # Docker build optimization
├── DEPLOYMENT.md      # Deployment guide (Render/Hugging Face)
└── README.md          # Documentation
```

**Note:** The model file is included in this directory for deployment purposes. The original model is also available at: `SDS-CP040-modelops/models/model.pkl`

## Setup

### Model Loading Priority
The application automatically finds the model in this order:
1. **Local directory** - `model.pkl` in the same folder as `main.py` (✅ included)
2. **Environment variable** - `MODEL_PATH` if set
3. **Repository root** - Falls back to `../../../../models/model.pkl`

Since `model.pkl` is already in this directory, no additional configuration is needed!

### Running Locally

1) Create a virtual environment and install dependencies
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2) Run the application
```bash
python main.py
```
The app runs on http://localhost:8000

**Optional**: Override model location
```bash
# Windows (PowerShell)
$Env:MODEL_PATH = "<ABSOLUTE_PATH_TO>/custom_model.pkl"
# macOS/Linux
export MODEL_PATH="<ABSOLUTE_PATH_TO>/custom_model.pkl"
```

## Using the App

### Web Interface
1) Open your browser at `http://localhost:8000`
2) Select car details using the dropdowns:
   - **Manufacturer** → **Model** (cascading dropdown)
   - **Fuel Type** (filtered based on model)
   - **Engine Size** (filtered based on model)
   - **Year of Manufacture** (2000-2025)
   - **Mileage** (preset options or custom input)
3) Click "Predict Price"
4) The predicted price displays in GBP (£)

### Interactive API Documentation
- **Swagger UI**: Visit `http://localhost:8000/docs` to:
  - View all endpoints and their schemas
  - Test API calls interactively with "Try it out"
  - See request/response examples
  - Copy curl commands

- **ReDoc**: Visit `http://localhost:8000/redoc` for:
  - Clean, readable documentation
  - Printer-friendly format
  - Easy navigation

## API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description | Response |
|----------|--------|-------------|----------|
| `/` | GET | Serves the HTML frontend | HTML page |
| `/health` | GET | Liveness probe for K8s/Docker | `{ "status": "healthy" }` |
| `/ready` | GET | Readiness probe (checks model loaded) | `{ "model_loaded": true\|false }` |
| `/features` | GET | Returns available feature values for dropdowns | Feature lists and ranges |
| `/metadata` | GET | Model information and feature schema | Model metadata |
| `/predict` | POST | Predicts car price | `{ "predicted_price_gbp": float }` |
| `/docs` | GET | Interactive API documentation (Swagger UI) | Auto-generated docs |
| `/redoc` | GET | Alternative API documentation (ReDoc) | Auto-generated docs |

### Example: Making a Prediction

**Request** (POST `/predict`):
```json
{
  "Manufacturer": "Toyota",
  "Model": "RAV4",
  "Fuel type": "Hybrid",
  "Engine size": 2.5,
  "Year of manufacture": 2020,
  "Mileage": 30000
}
```

**Success Response** (200):
```json
{
  "predicted_price_gbp": 25430.75
}
```

**Error Responses**:
- **503** - Model not loaded:
  ```json
  {
    "detail": "Model not loaded. Please check server logs and try again later."
  }
  ```
- **500** - Prediction error:
  ```json
  {
    "detail": "Prediction failed: <error details>"
  }
  ```
- **422** - Validation error (invalid input):
  ```json
  {
    "detail": [
      {
        "loc": ["body", "Engine size"],
        "msg": "ensure this value is greater than 0",
        "type": "value_error.number.not_gt"
      }
    ]
  }
  ```

## Technical Details

### Model Features
The model uses the following features:
- **Input**: Manufacturer, Model, Fuel type, Engine size, Year of manufacture, Mileage
- **Derived**: Age (current year - year of manufacture), Mileage per year, Vintage flag (age ≥ 20 years)
- **Current year**: Dynamically set to system date for age calculations

### Dropdown Data Sources

The application uses a **hybrid approach** for populating dropdown menus:

#### ✅ **From Trained Model** (Extracted at Runtime)
These values are **extracted directly from the model's OneHotEncoder** to ensure 100% compatibility:
- **Manufacturers**: BMW, Ford, Porsche, Toyota, VW
- **Models**: M5, X3, Z4, Fiesta, Focus, Mondeo, 718 Cayman, 911, Cayenne, Prius, RAV4, Yaris, Golf, Passat, Polo
- **Fuel Types**: Diesel, Hybrid, Petrol

**How it works**: The `/features` endpoint extracts categories from the model's preprocessor:
```python
categories = cat_transformer.categories_
manufacturers = sorted(categories[0].tolist())  # Directly from model
models = sorted(categories[1].tolist())          # Directly from model
fuel_types = sorted(categories[2].tolist())      # Directly from model
```

#### ⚙️ **Reasonable Defaults** (For User Convenience)
These provide sensible options for numeric fields (the model accepts any reasonable value):
- **Engine Sizes**: 0.8L to 5.0L (common car engine sizes)
- **Years**: 2000-2025 (reasonable car manufacturing years)
- **Mileage Options**: 0 to 300,000 km (with option for custom input)

**Model-by-Manufacturer Mapping**:
- Hardcoded in frontend for cascading dropdown functionality
- Can be overridden by placing a `models_map.json` file next to the model

### Error Handling
- **Backend**: HTTPException with detailed error messages and logging
- **Frontend**: User-friendly error messages with specific guidance:
  - Model loading issues
  - Invalid inputs
  - Network errors
  - Server errors with details

### Deployment Notes
- Frontend uses **relative URLs** for API calls, making it proxy-friendly
- **CORS is open** (`allow_origins=["*"]`) - restrict in production
- **Health checks** available for container orchestration
- **Environment variables** supported for flexible deployment
- Dependencies have **version ranges** to avoid breaking changes

## Troubleshooting

### Model Loading Issues
If you see "Model not loaded" errors:
1. Verify `model.pkl` exists in the same directory as `main.py` (it should be there)
2. Check the `/ready` endpoint: `curl http://localhost:8000/ready`
3. Set `MODEL_PATH` environment variable if you want to use a different model
4. Check server logs for detailed error messages (model path will be logged)

### Version Compatibility
The application includes automatic compatibility handling:
- **XGBoost**: Automatically handles models trained on older versions (deprecated parameters like `gpu_id` are patched at runtime)
- **Scikit-learn**: You may see version warnings - these are informational only and don't affect functionality
- The XGBoost warning about `Booster.save_model` is expected when loading older pickled models

### Port Already in Use
If port 8000 is busy:
```python
# In main.py, change:
uvicorn.run(app, host="0.0.0.0", port=8001)  # Use different port
```

## Deployment

This application is ready for production deployment with Docker support.

### Docker Deployment
The application includes a production-ready Dockerfile and can be deployed to:
- **Render** - Free/paid cloud platform with automatic deployments
- **Hugging Face Spaces** - ML-focused deployment platform
- Any Docker-compatible platform (AWS ECS, Google Cloud Run, Azure Container Apps, etc.)

**Quick Docker Test**:
```bash
docker build -t car-price-api .
docker run -p 8000:8000 car-price-api
```

**For detailed deployment instructions**, see [DEPLOYMENT.md](DEPLOYMENT.md) which includes:
- Step-by-step guides for Render and Hugging Face
- Environment configuration
- Troubleshooting tips
- Production recommendations

### Key Deployment Features
✅ Health checks for container orchestration
✅ Model included in Docker image
✅ Dynamic port binding (supports Render's PORT variable)
✅ Production-optimized dependencies
✅ Proper error handling and logging

## Future Enhancements
- [ ] Add authentication/authorization
- [ ] Implement rate limiting
- [ ] Add prediction history and analytics
- [ ] Support for batch predictions
- [ ] Model versioning and A/B testing
- [ ] Prometheus metrics endpoint
- [ ] Kubernetes deployment manifests
